# Quickstart

## Installing
Start by installing the `jolt` command line tool.
```
cargo +nightly install --git https://github.com/a16z/jolt --force --bins jolt
```

## Creating a Project
<!--- Note to maintainers: if these instructions change, please modify
    the `test-sdk` CI job to match.  --->

To create a project, use the `jolt new` command.
```
jolt new <PROJECT_NAME>
```

This will create a template Jolt project in the specified location. Make sure to cd into the project before running the next step.
```
cd <PROJECT_NAME>
```

## Project Tour
The main folder contains the host, which is the code that can generate and verify proofs. Within this main folder, there is another package called `guest` which contains the Rust functions that we can prove from the host. For more information about these concepts refer to the [guests and hosts](./guests_hosts.md) section.

We'll start by taking a look at our guest. We can view the guest code in `guest/src/lib.rs`.

```rust
#![cfg_attr(feature = "guest", no_std)]
#![no_main]

#[jolt::provable]
fn fib(n: u32) -> u128 {
    let mut a: u128 = 0;
    let mut b: u128 = 1;
    let mut sum: u128;
    for _ in 1..n {
        sum = a + b;
        a = b;
        b = sum;
    }
    b
}
```

As we can see, this implements a simple Fibonacci function called `fib`. All we need to do to make our function provable is add the `jolt::provable` macro above it.

Next let's take a look at the host code in `src/main.rs`.

```rust
pub fn main() {
    let (prove_fib, verify_fib) = guest::build_fib();

    let (output, proof) = prove_fib(50);
    let is_valid = verify_fib(proof);

    println!("output: {output}");
    println!("valid: {is_valid}");
}
```

This section simply imports `guest::build_fib` which is automatically generated by the `jolt::provable` macro, and returns functions for proving and verifying our function. The prove function takes the same inputs as the original `fib` function, but modifies the outputs to additionally return a proof. The verify function can then be used to check this proof, and return a boolean indicating its validity.

## Running
<!--- Note to maintainers: if these instructions change, please modify
    the `test-sdk` CI job to match.  --->

Let's now run the host with `cargo`.
```
cargo run --release
```

This will compile the guest, perform some required preprocessing, and execute the host code which proves and verifies the 50th Fibonacci number. This preprocessing is run within the `build_fib` function and adds significant time to running the host, but only needs to be performed once. This means that we could use the prove method many times without rerunning `build_fib`. In the future we will support caching this across runs of the host.

Note that many logs in the example are logged at the `info` level. To see these logs, you can set the `RUST_LOG` environment variable before running the host:
```
RUST_LOG=info cargo run --release
```

If everything is working correctly, you should see output similar to the following:
```
...
2025-11-05T22:17:43.849979Z  INFO jolt_core::zkvm: Proved in 2.6s (0.4 kHz / padded 0.8 kHz)
2025-11-05T22:17:43.923164Z  INFO example: output: 12586269025
2025-11-05T22:17:43.923300Z  INFO example: valid: true
```

## Development

### Rust

To build Jolt from source, you will need Rust:

- `curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh`
- Rustup should automatically install the Rust toolchain and necessary targets on
the first `cargo` invocation.
You may also need to add the RISC-V target for building guest programs manually: `rustup target add riscv64imac-unknown-none-elf`.

### mdBook

To build this book from source:

`cargo install mdbook mdbook-katex`

For watching the changes in your local browser:

`mdbook watch book --open`
